All this time we've been talking about
the global execution context and
how it's created and executed.
But we also mentioned that functions
are special in regards to this.
Here we'll talk about function
indication and the execution stack.
And we're going to introduce this
concept that will be fundamental to
understanding some very important
advanced concepts in JavaScript.
Before we do that, though,
we've rather casually used a word here,
a word that sounds a lot more
complex than it really is.
Big word alert- invocation.
That just means running a function or
calling a function.
So when we say we invoke the function or
function invocation,
we just mean hey, run the function.
In JavaScript,
we do that by using parenthesis.
Put the name of the function,
and then put parenthesis.
When you did that,
you invoked the function.
You told the JavaScript engine to run it.
So now let's talk about what happens when
you invoke a function in JavaScript.
To do that,
let's look at a simple example.
So I have a function b that I've created,
it does nothing.
A function a that calls,
or invokes function b.
And then I'm invoking function a.
This is a very simply example but
it helps us to understand what's
happening under the hood.
Now here comes this fundamental
very important concept.
Let's step through what we
know is going to happen first
If I put this code in
a JavaScript file and ran it.
First of all, what's going to be created?
That's right- a Global Execution Context.
The parser will parse the code and
then the compiler,
the program that's going to interpret
your code, will start up and
say, well I need to create
a Global Execution Context.
It'll create the variable this,
it'll create a global object,
if you're in the browser it will
create a window object, and
then it will attach these functions to it.
It will set up the memory space for
them in the creation phase of
the execution context, that first phase.
So b and a will be in memory, and then
the code will be executed line by line.
Now, it won't execute anything
in those functions because
they haven't been invoked.
But when it hits a at the bottom and
it says I'm supposed to invoke or
call or run that function a.
Here's the thing that actually happens.
A new execution context is created and
placed on what's called
the execution stack.
And a stack is just what it sounds like,
one on top of the other
on top of the other.
And whichever one is on top is
the one that's currently running.
So anytime you execute or
invoke a function in JavaScript,
a new execution context is created and
put on the execution stack.
So the execution context is created,
just like the global one.
It will have it's own space for
variables and functions.
It will go through that create phase, and
then it will execute line by line
the code within the function.
However, if I have another
function invocation,
it's going to stop at
that line of code and
create another execution context and
run that code.
Now in the case of b,
there is no code to run,
but this is how function
invocation happens in JavaScript.
Every function creates a new
execution context which runs through
the create phase then executes the code
line by line within the function.
When b finishes,
because it's at the top of the stack,
it will get popped off the stack,
then a, then back down to Global.
Notice that this doesn't matter.
The order lexically doesn't matter.
Nor does the rest of the code that happens
to be surrounding those function calls.
For example,
let's suppose we put a above b and
we had some other code
surrounding these function calls.
That doesn't matter.
Because even though lexically a is
above b, remember what's happening.
Both of those functions are already
in memory during the create phase
of the initial global execution context.
Those "var c," "var d" that you see
down below each of those function calls,
let's talk about what's gonna happen.
First of all,
a at the bottom will invoke function a.
So, that will be the next
put on the execution stack.
The execution context for the function a.
Then, that becomes the currently
running code which means that very last
line at the bottom, var d below the a,
that's not going to be run yet.
Because JavaScript is synchronous,
one line at at time.
And what's running is the current code
within the current execution context.
Which is the one at the top of the stack.
So when a is at the top of the stack,
it will start to run line by line.
It hits that line where it invokes b.
B creates a new execution context, so
that becomes the top of the stack, and
so it is running line by line.
And it runs its single line of code there,
and
only when it finishes will
we go back to finishing a.
Why?
Because when the function finishes,
the execution context is what's
called popped off of the stack.
So now, what's the current
execution context again?
a.
So it runs the next line
of code that hadn't yet
been run inside that execution context.
Meaning that var c line.
And then, when a is finished,
it's popped off the stack.
And the next line of code that hasn't yet
been run in the global execution context
is run, which is that very last var d.
See how that works?
Every time a function is called,
a new execution context is created for
that function.
The this variable is created for
The variables within it are set
up during the creation phase.
And the code is executed line by line.
But every time a function is invoked,
even if it's invoking itself,
a new execution context is created,
put on top of the stack, and
then when the function finishes,
it's popped off.
And whatever's at the top is
what's currently running.
Line by line, synchronously.
This concept is very important to have
in your mind as your mental model for
what's happening as you're
invoking functions.
Because it has to do with the rest
of what we're going to discuss.